[MUSIC PLAYING]
Hello, this is
Lilou for Gaiam TV.
And today I'm in Manchester
in cold England with Steve.
Hello.
-Hi.
I'm cold, too.
Well, it's all in
the mind, isn't it?
That's right.
I use my vital energies
to warm me up a bit.
So you're an author
and a lecturer.
You wrote many books.
How many?
Seven, including
my book of poetry.
Six nonfiction prose books
and one book of poetry.
And the latest one is
"Back to Sanity," right?
And before that was,
"Out of the Darkness?"
Mm-hm.
That's right.
And before that I had a book
called, "Waking from Sleep."
And before that there's a
book called, "The Fall,"
and a couple of other books.
So you do lectures at
the University of Leeds.
And do you practice?
What is your day to day life
like so that we can understand
how you came to this
place of teaching people
to live more fully and
more in the present moment?
I lecture at Leeds
Metropolitan University.
I'm I lecturer in
transversal psychology.
And ever since I
was a teenager--
maybe 15 or
16-years-old-- I've always
felt connected to something
spiritual inside myself.
So when I was a teenager,
I was the complete opposite
of a normal teenager.
I didn't go out to nightclubs.
I went to open spaces
and fields and parks
to walk around on my own.
And I felt very
attracted to nature,
to stillness, and to quietness.
And, as a result, people
thought I was a bit strange.
And I thought I
was a bit strange.
So it took me a
long time to accept
my basic spiritual nature
and to understand it
because my background
was completely
non-spiritual,
non-religious, typical kind
of northern working
class English background.
So it took me a long time to
understand myself completely.
But once I did, once I realized
that there was such a thing
as meditation, and
there was such things
as spiritual traditions
and spiritual books,
they gave me a framework
to understand myself.
And after that I integrated
spirituality into my life.
And life is quite hectic now.
I've three young children.
And so life is quite busy.
And I'm working as a lecturer.
I'm trying to write
whenever I can.
The difficult thing is finding
time to do some writing.
It's quite impressive to have
even Eckhart Tolle say that you
bring an important piece here.
And Eckhart Tolle
obviously is right now
I think the number one
I mean in that hundred
top spiritual
people in the world.
You're part of that list, too.
-Yeah.
I think Eckhart has gone
down to number two now.
The Dali Lama is number one.
But I'm working my way up.
Next year I expect
to be in the top 10.
No.
Only joking.
No, it's great.
It's great.
I started writing
maybe 15 years ago.
My first couple of books
weren't particularly good
and they weren't published.
But about 10 years
ago my writing
started to be published in
magazines and in journals.
I write in some
academic journals, too.
My last three or four books
have been fairly successful
and they've built
up some momentum.
And I've become
slightly more prominent
and that's really good.
You speak about the
ego madness and there's
something in this world that
is not quite going right.
Can you tell us more about it?
Because our ego does want
to get to the top 10--
if not number one.
So tell us what you've learned
there through your research.
Well I call it humania.
Humania is my term for the
madness of the human mind.
And I think first of all if
you look back at human history,
if you go back a few
thousand years, if you look
into previous
civilizations, human history
is an endless story
of insanities,
an endless story of brutality,
conflict, and oppression.
The oppressions of
different classes.
The oppression of women.
The oppression of everybody
apart from a small group
of elite or privileged people.
And there's endless
warfare, endless conflict,
sexual repression, the
repression of completely
natural human impulses,
and also there's
hostility towards nature.
That's still obviously
very prevalent
nowadays with our
environmental problems.
We're close to
seriously severely
damaging our environment.
So it's obvious that
there's something
not quite right about human
beings collectively and also
individually.
I know when I was a teenager
I'd walk down streets,
and in every house
I'd see people
watching TV in living
room after living
room walking down the streets.
Somebody would be sitting
there staring at a picture
box in the corner of the room.
Family or a person on their own.
And it made me think.
Why do people need to do this?
Why do people need to
watch TV 30 hours a week?
What are they trying
to escape from?
And then I remember
when I left university
I did a few dreary office jobs.
And in one of the first ones
I met a guy who had actually
retired from his previous
job but he'd come back
to work because he was bored.
He said to me, I don't
like doing nothing
so I've come back to work.
And I thought it was amazing
that somebody who was retired
would actually choose
to come back to work.
And it's partly this
disease of doing.
It's the desire to
constantly be active.
So it's always seemed to
me that human beings--
or actually human doings-- human
beings is actually a misnomer.
It's very different
for us to be.
And so I wanted to analyze
why do human beings
find it so difficult to be.
Why do we need to do
things all the time?
What do we need to put our
attention in television
programs or in the internet.
Why are we trying to
escape from ourselves?
And what we're trying to escape
from is a discord in our minds.
I call it psychological discord.
Partly it's the sense of
ego separation, a sense
of being apart from
our environment
and being alone in
our mental space.
And it's also the crazy
restlessness of our minds.
When people are on the
road with nothing to do,
they're faced with the crazy
restlessness, the chattering
thoughts which produce
anxieties about the future,
which produce feelings
of bitterness or guilt
about the past.
So this chattering
mind-- on the one hand
it causes a disturbance inside
of us, and on the other hand
it creates anxiety, it
creates negative feelings
about the future and the past
or about life in general.
So I think collectively
and also individually it's
obvious that there's
something not
quite right about human beings.
So are you saying also then
that if we feel this way
it's due to a
collective thoughts?
It might not be our
own thoughts that might
be why we're so disturbed?
Maybe we inherit
but also kind of
absorb and sponge some other
people's emotions and egos?
Or how do you see all of this?
How does it work?
I think that's true.
I mean, the idea that an
individual is really a fallacy.
There's no such thing
as an individual.
Even though we often have
the sense that we're alone
in our mental space with our own
thoughts and our own feelings.
That's an illusion.
In reality we're constantly
absorbing impressions and even
thoughts from other people.
So you can sense it.
If you go into a room and
somebody is in a bad mood,
you pick up on that
mood straight away.
It's actually called mood
contagion in psychology.
If someone is in a
good mood, you maybe
don't even know it
consciously, but their mood
somehow spreads to you.
It's like a radiance around
them that spreads to you.
And the other thing, we do
subconsciously absorb thoughts
from other people, too.
So it's a vicious circle.
If the people around us
are thinking negatively,
if they're full of disturbance,
then that will spread to us.
Although it could
in a positive way
work positively if
we think positively
and appreciatively
thoughts of gratitude,
and that would spread, as well.
And how is that linked?
So psychology, how does
that understanding better
human beings and this part
that you just explained on ego,
how does that help us in
our own spiritual evolution?
I think it's
important to understand
the workings of the
ego, because then
you can begin to transcend it.
You need to understand
the problem in order
to transcend that problem.
So I think the first step
for me is to understand
the workings of the ego.
That's what I try to do in "Back
to Sanity," in the first part
of the book, anyway.
And I sort of tried to do
that earlier in my book
before where I try to
explain the development
of the ego in historical terms.
So I think it's really
important in that first stage
of understanding and then you
can begin to unpick the ego
and work out how
to transcend it.
And that's what you explain?
You tell us how to be
in the present moment
and to let go of that ego?
Is it really possible?
Yes, I think so.
Is that what some people
call enlightenment?
Yeah.
Spiritual awakening.
Well, it's both.
Yeah.
You can call it enlightenment
or spiritual awakening.
But I think there are varying
degrees along that path.
There's not a sudden break.
For some people there
may be a sudden break
into enlightenment.
But often it's a
very gradual process.
So I think the important
thing about humania,
as I call it-- the madness
of the human mind--
it can be healed.
Like any psychological
disorder, it can be treated
and it can be healed.
Do you have to see
the world as mad first?
Well, yeah.
-It's not our fault.
-Well, yeah.
You have to look
at the human mind
and realize what's wrong
with the human mind.
What are the factors which
cause our sufferings.
It's a bit like
Buddhism, really.
Buddhism is all about trying
to transcend suffering.
And in order to
transcend suffering,
the Buddha tries to
understand the human mind.
And then he suggests the
way to transcend suffering.
So in "Back to Sanity"
I suggest an eight
stage path through which
we can transcend humania.
Tell us more.
I mean, I have
many questions now
about the different stages of
evolution, as you describe it,
but also how to transcend.
Well, for some
people, transcendence
can happen very suddenly.
I talked about that in my
book, "Out of the Darkness."
Especially when people go
through intense turmoil
and suffering, it
can suddenly jolt
them into a state of awakening,
which can become permanent.
But for other people it's
a more gradual process
through personal development
or spiritual development.
And I think there are a number
of stages along that path.
I think one of the
first stages is learning
to live with ourselves.
We're so addicted
to external stimuli.
We're so addicted to
fixing our attention
to external things like TV,
computers, books, magazines.
The first stage
for many people is
to learn to live with
themselves and to learn
to live in the present moment
without fixing their attention
to something external.
And for some people
that's quite a big step.
To go inside your
own mind and feel
comfortable inside your own
mind is quite a big step.
Yeah.
It really feels there's
something else just before
that to be able to even
be there and realize
that you can just be.
Yeah.
One of the important
stages, the initial stages,
is to stand back from your
own mind or your own thoughts
and learn to observe
them, because most people
for most of the time
are completely caught
up in their own thoughts.
It's like a river.
If you imagine a
river flowing by,
most people are
flowing with the river.
But we need to imagine
that we're standing
back, sitting on the
bank of the river
watching the river flow by.
And once you learn the
ability to stand back
from your thoughts,
then you're no longer
affected by them as much.
You're no longer affected
by negative thoughts.
You can think a negative
thought and you're
aware it's just a negative
thought and let it go by.
It doesn't trigger
a negative emotion.
And you could call that
disidentifying with thoughts.
And also once you
disidentify with thoughts,
once you stand back and observe
them, they lose their power.
Thoughts are fueled
by attention.
Attention is like
the gasoline which
fuels the motor of thinking.
So if you withdraw your
attention and stand back,
thoughts naturally
fade away like a car
when it runs out of gas.
So that's really important.
And then it goes,
[SPUTTERING ENGINE SOUND].
Yeah.
That's right.
So at some point we will want
more of that peaceful state?
We'll seek more of that?
It feels, I think
to a lot of us,
like there's these washing
machines before we get
to this place where
we flip it and it's
more of the peacefulness than
the ego mind running the show.
That's right.
I think most fundamental
nature is harmony.
I contrast humania with harmony.
We all have moments
of harmony of being,
as I call it, from time to time.
Harmony of being in nature,
for example, as we are today.
People often experience that
sense of ease and calmness
when they're in
natural surroundings.
They feel a sense of
connection to nature.
Other people experience it when
they go running or swimming.
It happens a lot
after sex, as well.
A sense of connection, that
sense of inner well being,
sense of transcendence.
And many other situations, too.
And there are a lot of
people who go and practice
extreme sports like maybe hang
gliding, paragliding, climbing,
and things like that.
And I think these sports can
generate harmony of being too
because they involve
so much concentration
that the mind becomes so focused
that it becomes very quiet.
Thoughts begin to fade away.
Interesting that you bring
that up because immediately
we think of adrenaline
and this rush
and this kind of natural drug
and you wanting more of it.
Is it the same for
spiritual awakening
and when you arrive to
this place of harmony?
I think so.
I mean, people who do these
sports are sometimes called
thrill seekers or
adrenaline seekers,
but I think they're also
seeking a harmony of being.
They're seeking the
spaciousness and fullness which
comes when your mind is empty.
And I think for some surfing
is well known for producing
spiritual feelings.
Some people suggest that surfing
could be a kind of religion
because surfers are very
aware of these transcendental
feelings that they have.
And it's the same
thing again, it's
partly content with nature.
It's partly quieting the mind
so much that your ego boundaries
begin to fade away and
you feel the spaciousness
and fullness of true being.
And when the ego really
screams out and is really
there is those fears, because
there is fears attached
to the ego, isn't there?
How do you deal with that
when it's really strong
and you nearly feel you
can't breathe anymore?
I think partly fears are
generated by thoughts.
The thought always
precedes the fear.
So if you analyze
your thinking, you'll
probably come upon
some negative scripts,
some sort of habitual
cognitive patterns
which create these fears.
It's like flying, for example.
I used to be afraid of flying.
Commercial airplanes?
Any airplanes.
-Not just piloting?
-No.
Any airplanes.
And I realized that
it's basically thoughts.
I was sort of creating
scenarios in my mind
about things going wrong.
It was basically sort
of images and scenarios
forming in my mind.
And once I learned to quiet
my mind in that situation
when I was flying, and also
once I learned to override
those negative thought
patterns with more rational,
positive thought patterns,
then I began to lose the fear.
But also I think
there can be more
deep rooted fears which stem
from childhood experiences.
It could be trauma.
And those kind of fears
and that kind of pain
can be very difficult
to transcend.
I think for that
kind of pain you
really need to see a
psychotherapist to try
to override or transcend.
The pain is really
deep inside the psyche.
How do we know if we
really need external help?
Because sometimes
it appears so real
the fear of let's say when you
lose your job or everything
collapses in your life.
Your identity, what you
identified before is no longer,
and this seems all so
brutal, so difficult,
like an old world is
literally collapsing.
And sometimes it feels like to
me that's what a lot of people
are going through these
days through 2012.
With those issues I think
it's very important to be aware
that there's always a positive
side to any kind of loss
or any kind of collapse,
even though it can seem very
devastating and it can
create lots of turmoil
and can lead to trauma.
But in every loss there's
always a new beginning.
There's always an opening
to spiritual energies
and spiritual potentials.
In my book, "Out
of the Darkness,"
I did lots of research about the
effects of trauma and turmoil.
And I found that that was
by far the most powerful
trigger of spiritual awakening.
Even most of the
spiritual teachers
who are well known
today, many of them,
went through this very
pronounced period of turmoil,
like Eckhart Tolle,
Byron Katie, for example.
And many, many people go
through that before they
become awakened.
And partly what happens
is that all of these
attachments that we identify
with-- our sense of who we are,
a sense that we're
important, a sense
that you've built up some
power or status, that you have
a certain future
in front of you,
that you have a certain
path behind, that you have
a certain role in
society with possessions
and so forth-- all
of these things
are attachments that build
up your sense of self.
I sometimes call them the
building blocks of the ego.
The scaffolding that
supports the ego.
But when terrible
experiences occur,
these attachments
are broken away.
You lose your job.
You lose your future.
You lose your friends.
You learn your partner through
divorce or perhaps bereavement.
-Lose your health.
-Or your health.
Yeah.
You may be faced
with imminent death.
You may be told that you
only have a certain amount
of time left to live.
And obviously you
feel devastated.
Your whole world collapses.
But when that happens for
some people-- not everybody,
but for some
people-- there can be
this sudden, miraculous
opening to spiritual awakening.
The old self collapses.
And it's almost as if there
is a latent higher self which
suddenly bursts forth and
emerges like a butterfly
emerging from a chrysalis.
And that latent higher self
becomes your normal self.
The old self dies.
And like a phoenix arising,
a new self-- a higher self--
takes over and become
your normal self.
Does that happen in the moment
of connecting to a higher power
or source or the universe?
Does it go through that?
Did you find out that it
has to go through that,
or just it can be in a moment?
Is there something that
triggers this kind of opening?
The trigger for most of the
people that I've spoken to--
and this is my own
experience, too-- the trigger
is acceptance and
surrender or letting go.
For some people it
was their suffering
was so intense that they
couldn't fight it anymore.
Like I spoke to one
woman who lost her job,
she was divorced
from her partner.
She felt like a
complete failure.
She was very depressed.
She didn't feel like she
could leave her house.
She stayed inside for two weeks.
She wanted to die basically
but she didn't have
the courage to commit suicide.
One day she just
said, that's enough,
I can't fight this anymore.
I'm just giving up.
I don't care.
And that was the moment when
something moved inside her.
And another example was a friend
of mine who was an alcoholic
and he went to
Alcoholics Anonymous.
And he went through
the process of handing
over his problem, which is
part of the process in AA.
And he said to himself, this
is too big for me to deal with.
I've tried to fight it.
I can't fight it.
I'm going to hand it
over to a higher power,
whatever the higher power is.
And, again, it was
just in that moment
of handing over that he felt
something change inside him.
It was almost as if a dam
suddenly burst open inside him
and this new energy, this
blissful energy suddenly arose
and filled his whole being.
And he suddenly felt
like a different person.
And that continued.
So surrender or letting
go, you could call it
the alchemical agent which
enables this transformation
to take place.
I remember this moment
in my personal journey,
this moment of suffering.
And, all of a sudden, I
had open arms and looked up
and there was really
literally in that instant the
taking a lot of air.
And I could feel the
light and the air
coming in every single
part of inside of the body,
like really just re-energizing.
It felt so good, like
I'm breathing again.
You know?
Yeah.
I think many people
when they go through
something they contract.
They make themselves smaller.
But if you open yourself up--
Well, it was the
ultimate moment
because before that
there was some suffering.
-Yeah.
-It was a good part.
That was a positive part.
Yeah.
But if you open
yourself up, then
you allow the
potentially positive side
to manifest itself.
And later on, once
we are in that phase,
once that first phase
of spiritual awakening
has happened, what's next?
Well, for some people,
spiritual transformation
is not a straightforward
transition
into bliss and peacefulness.
For some people there's
a period of confusion
afterwards even though they
feel a sense of calmness
and a sense of
bliss even inside,
they feel connected to
something transcendent.
They still sometimes
feel confused
because maybe they don't have
a background in spirituality.
Maybe the people around
them don't understand them.
They don't understand
themselves.
So there can be some confusion.
And sometimes even they
begin to doubt themselves.
They begin to wonder, am I mad?
What's happening to me?
Why am I so different?
So it's really important
that these people
have a supportive framework.
It's really important
that they establish
an intellectual framework
which enables them
to understand what's happened.
And often that happens
naturally anyway.
They gravitate to
spiritual books.
They naturally gravitate
to spiritual groups.
They begin to meditate.
So slowly they begin to piece
together what's happening.
But also there can be
some slight disturbances
in the mind, as well.
There can be some
strange sensations,
some psychic episodes which
they may not understand,
which may make them
feel some anxiety.
And it may also be difficult for
them to cope in everyday life
because they sometimes
begin to enjoy being so much
that they find it
difficult to do.
It's the exact opposite
of the normal situation.
So they need to find a
balance where they're not so
blissed out and so
immersed in their own bliss
that they forget to live
in the real world-- well,
the seemingly real world.
They forget to live
in the everyday world.
And that normally
happens after a while.
But sometimes there
is a difficult period
of integration.
-And then?
Your ultimate state?
Well I think in the end most
people do become balanced.
The ideal state is to
find a state of balance.
To integrate the awakened state
into your normal personality
and to live with
it on a daily basis
and to function in
the everyday world,
to be able to function
in relationships,
and to be active in the world.
That's the ideal state.
And in some spiritual
traditions--
in the Indian
tradition it's called
Sahaja Samadhi, for example.
This constant state of Samadhi.
Samadhi isn't just a
state where you bliss out
and forget the material
world and transcend
the material world.
It's Sahaja Samadhi where
you live in the real world--
in the everyday world--
but you are awakened
and you bring your awakening
to other people, too.
That's one of the
ideal things too
that once you become
established in awakening,
your awakening begins to radiate
to other people around you
and they begin to move
towards awakening, too.
Your radiance spreads
to them and awakens
something inside of
them and it encourages
their development, too.
Pretty good news, huh?
It's good news.
Because there's a lot of
people that have partners
that might not be spiritual.
And so what you're
saying-- you're at work
maybe or in the family--
but you're saying if we are
just that, not
having expectations,
then something happens there.
Possibly?
Possibly.
I mean, I've found that it did
cause problems that when people
had this awakening
it sometimes caused
problems in relationships.
Sometimes lead to divorce.
People saying, you don't
understand me anymore.
You've gone crazy.
I don't understand you.
So obviously it
can cause problems.
We were talking earlier
about mood contagion.
It's a similar thing.
You're awakening.
Awakening seems to be more
contagious than anything.
More contagious than any mood.
And it can spread to
the people around you.
That's the potentially
positive side.
Did you see on a scientific
level what happens really?
You mean in the brain?
I'm wondering what we emanate.
Or is there something
that makes it so?
I think in really
moving beyond science
or beyond mainstream science.
Mainstream science would try
to explain it in terms of brain
chemistry, certain bits
of the brain are active,
and certain brain chemicals
are firing or connecting.
So I think you really
need to move beyond that.
You talk about energies
which mainstream
science really doesn't accept.
The idea of an
inner vital energy
is not accepted by
most scientists.
But I think that's
what's happening.
When somebody
becomes enlightened,
their life energy becomes
so powerful and so pure
that it naturally radiates.
They become like suns.
They become like suns
radiating their enlightenment
toward other people.
Like dolphins.
Like dolphins, too.
And, again, it gives a lie to
the illusion of individuality.
The illusion that we're encased
in this body and I'm in here,
you're in there,
and we can't really
communicate except through
words or hand signals.
Really that's a big fallacy.
We're communicating
through energies.
We're exchanging energies.
And there are all
kinds of unconscious
or seemingly transcientific
phenomenon happening.
How do you see oneness?
Is that the oneness
that a lot of people
talk about that we might
reach on the planet?
Partly.
At the moment I'm struggling
with the coldness.
Forget the oneness.
I'm struggling with the
coldness in Manchester.
Well, yeah, oneness is the
true nature of all beings.
Separateness is the illusion
and oneness is our true nature.
And partly it is the
activity of our minds
which creates the
illusion of separateness.
When you think, you reinforce
the sense of I. There's
always an I which is thinking.
Could be an eye observing.
Oh, la la.
That's right.
Well, yeah, there's both.
There's a thinking
eye and observing eye.
But the observing eye
isn't a separate eye.
The observing eye is part
of this interconnected
network of consciousness.
But when you stop thinking,
when your mind becomes quiet,
then you sink into
this ocean of oneness.
And when your mind
is really clear,
you feel this sense
of spaciousness
and you do feel in some way,
you spread beyond your own body.
You transcend separateness
into the space around you
and you begin to connect
with other people.
And at a really deep
level you become so deeply
immersed in pure consciousness
that any sense of separation
fades away.
You realize that the fundamental
reality of the universe
is this ocean of
pure consciousness.
And that's the most fundamental
level of your being, too.
In your true nature,
in your deepest nature,
you're a part of this ocean.
And all reality, all nature, all
other living beings, all space
is also part of
this ocean of being.
For a lot of us it's
still very conceptual.
But we feel it more in nature.
There's different phases
too within that, I guess.
I think even at the
conceptual levels,
or to a more superficial
level, you can still sense it.
You can sense it in nature.
I think that's why
nature is so appealing.
That's why so many people love
to walk in the countryside,
because in the
countryside I think
nature radiates stillness.
And in nature our minds
naturally become quieter.
We begin to tune in to this
connection, this connectedness.
And we begin to
sense that oneness.
Are you cold?
I'm a bit cold.
Do you want to get your jumper?
I'm OK.
for now.
So the practices--
walking in nature
could be one of those practices?
I think in
spiritual development
there is sometimes this idea
that spiritual practice means
doing meditation, doing yoga,
maybe doing a bit of bit
Tai Chi, et cetera.
You look like somebody
that does Tai Chi.
I have done it in the past.
I did Qigong, which
is really similar.
And I do yoga every so often.
And I meditate regularly.
But I think the term
"spiritual practice"
should be much broader.
It should encompass many other
activities besides purely
spiritual practice.
So I think if you approach it
in the right frame of mind,
walking in the countryside
is a spiritual practice.
Swimming can be a
spiritual practice.
Sex can be a spiritual practice.
And obviously in
the tantric schools
that idea is quite prominent.
And running can be a
spiritual practice.
All kinds of sports.
Surfing, for example,
climbing-- they
can all be spiritual
practices because they
all lead to connectedness.
They all have a mind
quieting effect.
And they all lead to a
sense of transcendence.
So they're all
spiritual practices.
When we're in purpose, it's a
spiritual practice, isn't it?
It's a form of meditation.
We're more in the
present moment.
We're enjoying it.
The heart opens.
-Yeah.
That's right.
In fact, anything,
even making the dinner,
even washing the dishes, they
can be spiritual practices.
Not washing the dishes.
I would be a good practice.
Well, have you
got a dishwasher?
Yes.
Well, even loading
dishes in the dishwasher
could be a spiritual practice.
If you approach it in
the right frame of mind--
if you approach it
mindfully-- if you attempt
to be consciously aware
of what you're doing,
then it can become a
spiritual practice.
And when we are
in purpose-- I'm
going back to this
because it seems like when
our soul does the work
it's supposed to do
it feels like it's a blessing.
There's gratitude.
There's heart connection.
There's being in
the present moment.
The mind is less running.
That's why I'm interested also
to do some interviews about how
to live one's life purpose,
because I think there
is a lot there in our
spiritual awakening and growth
within that.
-That's right.
And it's not something
you can consciously do.
You have to let go and allow
the purpose to take you along.
You have to learn to
flow with your purpose.
So if you approach it too
intellectually with your ego,
you'll fall away from that.
So it's important to relax.
Tell us, to end this
conversation, the conversation
you had with Eckhart Tolle.
What are the latest
spiritual conversations
of the top people in the world?
Well, he was
interested in my poetry.
He read out a
couple of my poems.
-Your latest poem here.
-Yeah.
I just published my first book
of poems called, "The Meaning."
And Eckhart, he really liked
them and read a couple of them
out.
And he was interested in
where poetry comes from.
So we were talking about
the creative intelligence.
A bit like you were
saying before when
you find yourself on purpose.
When you open your heart
and flow with your purpose.
Poetry is a bit like
that, or all creativity
is a bit like that.
You have to let your
rational mind fade away
and just let the
poetry come to you.
You have to be
open to the source,
and the source will come to you.
I think that place--
all the great artists
were spiritual to some
degree because they
didn't create with their
minds, the creation
flowed through them.
Kind of being channeled.
I mean, Mozart, for example,
said he didn't write the music,
he heard the music in his
head and he wrote it down.
Many painters were the same.
So we were talking about that.
And we were talking about how
the ego takes over our minds
and leads to chaos and
crisis in the world.
Those kind of things.
I'm sure you have lots and
lots to talk about with him.
He's really relaxed and has
this really monotoned voice.
I mean, it's a good
spiritual voice, isn't it?
Yeah.
When you talk to him
you sort of naturally
fall into the mode of stillness.
And you can feel it.
You can feel it
radiating from him.
This stillness.
And so you naturally
become quite calm.
So he has evolved
in his own process
from where we knew him from "The
Power of the Present Moment,"
I think it was, or "The Power
of Now," and to "The New Earth"
and where he is now?
-Yeah.
Did he evolve as
a spiritual being,
because the ego could
definitely jump in that one.
I don't know how
it's been for him.
But with Oprah and the TV
and him being number one.
I said to him, well, last
year he was number one
and this year he's number two.
So, I said, how do
you feel about that?
About slipping down?
He said, oh, it was
a big disappointment.
No.
I don't think he minds.
I think he's very
happy walking his dog.
He's got a dog who he loves.
He's very happy
living a simple life.
And he's very funny.
I think in his teachings now
he's developed his humor.
He's really, really funny now.
It's like going to
the comedy store.
It's like a spiritual
comedy store.
It goes hand in hand
because then things
are not as significant
or a serious anymore
and it becomes really
simple, doesn't it?
That's true.
I mean, one of my
guidelines, if you like,
as to whether somebody is
really spiritually awakened
is to whether they are
humorous and funny,
whether they smile a lot.
If you're serious,
then it's probably
a sign that you're not really
as awakened as you'd hoped.
Because once you awaken,
there's a sense of ease.
You do begin to look at the
world in a humorous way.
Things fall lightly on you.
You don't take things
seriously anymore.
Even if you look into the
chaos and madness of the world,
you still don't let it
bare on you heavily.
You have this relaxed sense
of ease and calm, which
manifests itself in humor.
And this understanding
that everything
falls in place at the
right moment, too.
There is a certain knowing and
we're more relaxed, isn't it?
It's a trust, isn't it?
If you trust in the world, than
you accept what will happen
and you believe, or you
know, that eventually things
will fall into place.
If you don't believe that, if
you believe the whole world is
random, that the
world is chaotic
and things just happen
completely randomly,
then there's a sense of anxiety.
You never know what's
going to happen.
You can't predict the future.
You're always a bit
wary of the world
because you don't understand it.
But if you know that things
are going to work out,
suddenly you can relax.
It's beautiful
to not know also.
I think we try to
rationalize everything
and to understand
everything, but it's
part of the spiritual quest to
just understand that there's
so much bigger than us and we
can't understand everything
and it's OK.
It's totally fine.
It's beautiful.
That's one of the issues I
have with mainstream science.
I mean, I love science.
I really like astronomy.
I love finding out
about the human body
and how the universe works.
I love science.
I've always read science
and scientific books.
But I really
dislike the attitude
of many scientists,
which is that we
can understand the world.
We are going to
understand the world.
We just need to find
out a few more things,
and then we'll have the
whole picture in place.
And then we'll have absolute
power because we will have
absolute understanding and we'll
be able to manipulate the world
or control it even more.
I think that's a really
dangerous attitude
and also a very negative one.
Because it's great to accept
that the world is in some ways
beyond our comprehension.
And there's also a big fallacy
in that scientists believe
that the world--
or they perceive
with their ordinary
senses-- is the reality.
They believe that
it's absolute reality
and that the human mind can
understand absolute reality.
But I believe that the
human mind is limited.
Our awareness is
definitely limited.
We know that because
we have experiences
where awareness expands.
But our normal
awareness is limited.
And also every animal
has limited awareness.
A sheep has a limited awareness.
An insect has a
limited awareness.
So human beings obviously
have a limited awareness, too.
So one day there will
be beings in existence
who have a much more
expansive awareness than us
and who perceive
much wider realities
and who perceive a
completely different reality.
So it's obvious that the
world is teeming with things
we don't understand.
And, as you say, it's
great to accept that.
It's wonderful.
It's great to open up to the
strangeness and the amazingness
of the world.
-[INAUDIBLE] like a child.
-Like a child.
Exactly.
I mean, I see that
in my young children
that the world is such
an amazing place to them.
It's full of miracles.
There's no such thing
as a mundane event
or an ordinary event.
Everything is miraculous.
Especially chocolate cake.
Well, thank you so, Steve, for
this conversation for Gaiam TV.
I'm excited to add this
to this beautiful library
of conversation in the
world so that it can help
other people like
us-- all of us--
are on this spiritual journey.
There's no end and it's OK.
-That's great.
Yeah.
That's one of the things
we need to open up to.
The journey is a process
which never ends.
So if you have one final word
that you want to leave us on,
whether we have said
it already but you feel
it's very important
to keep in mind.
Maybe humania is on
the surface of the mind.
All the restlessness
of the mind,
all of the thought chatter
and all the discord
is just on the surface.
But underneath the
surface there is
a deep reservoir of stillness.
It's a bit like a sea.
On top of the sea
you have the waves.
The rush of the waves.
The turmoil of the
surface of the sea.
But underneath the surface
there's this endless depth
of stillness.
And that's our true nature.
Our true nature is the
endless depths of stillness.
And what we need to do
is to tame the surface,
to heal the discord
on the surface
so that we can gain
permanent contact
with the stillness underneath.
-Thank you.
Thank you very much for that.
I'm very visual, so
it really spoke to me.
And I think it's great to
make metaphors like that so we
can feel it on a deeper level.
Yeah.
Thank you so much, Steve.
Thank you very much.
Much love.
My beautiful co-creator
is from Manchester.
And I'll be heading
soon to Glasgow
for some more
delicious interviews
with some beautiful
authors of the Hay
House Publishing Company.
Thank you so much.
Much, much love.
Please share these videos.
I send you much love
from Manchester.
Thank you.
Bye.